colonies. See Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum Dissertat. xiii.*

      331  return  * The right of Latium conferred an exemption from
      the government of the Roman praefect. Strabo states this
      distinctly, l. iv. p. 295, edit. Caesar's. See also Walther, p.
      233.-M*

      34  return  * Spanheim, Orbis Roman. c. 8, p. 62.*

      35  return  * Aristid. in Romae Encomio. tom. i. p. 218, edit.
      Jebb.*

      36  return  * Tacit. Annal. xi. 23, 24. Hist. iv. 74.*

      So sensible were the Romans of the influence of language over
      national manners, that it was their most serious care to extend,
      with the progress of their arms, the use of the Latin tongue. 37
      The ancient dialects of Italy, the Sabine, the Etruscan, and the
      Venetian, sunk into oblivion; but in the provinces, the east was
      less docile than the west to the voice of its victorious
      preceptors. This obvious difference marked the two portions of
      the empire with a distinction of colors, which, though it was in
      some degree concealed during the meridian splendor of prosperity,
      became gradually more visible, as the shades of night descended
      upon the Roman world. The western countries were civilized by the
      same hands which subdued them. As soon as the barbarians were
      reconciled to obedience, their minds were open to any new
      impressions of knowledge and politeness. The language of Virgil
      and Cicero, though with some inevitable mixture of corruption,
      was so universally adopted in Africa, Spain, Gaul, Britain, and
      Pannonia, 38 that the faint traces of the Punic or Celtic idioms
      were preserved only in the mountains, or among the peasants. 39
      Education and study insensibly inspired the natives of those
      countries with the sentiments of Romans; and Italy gave fashions,
      as well as laws, to her Latin provincials. They solicited with
      more ardor, and obtained with more facility, the freedom and
      honors of the state; supported the national dignity in letters 40
      and in arms; and at length, in the person of Trajan, produced an
      emperor whom the Scipios would not have disowned for their
      countryman. The situation of the Greeks was very different from
      that of the barbarians. The former had been long since civilized
      and corrupted. They had too much taste to relinquish their
      language, and too much vanity to adopt any foreign institutions.
      Still preserving the prejudices, after they had lost the virtues,
      of their ancestors, they affected to despise the unpolished
      manners of the Roman conquerors, whilst they were compelled to
      respect their superior wisdom and power. 41 Nor was the influence
      of the Grecian language and sentiments confined to the narrow
      limits of that once celebrated country. Their empire, by the
      progress of colonies and conquest, had been diffused from the
      Adriatic to the Euphrates and the Nile. Asia was covered with
      Greek cities, and the long reign of the Macedonian kings had
      introduced a silent revolution into Syria and Egypt. In their
      pompous courts, those princes united the elegance of Athens with
      the luxury of the East, and the example of the court was
      imitated, at an humble distance, by the higher ranks of their
      subjects. Such was the general division of the Roman empire into
      the Latin and Greek languages. To these we may add a third
      distinction for the body of the natives in Syria, and especially
      in Egypt, the use of their ancient dialects, by secluding them
      from the commerce of mankind, checked the improvements of those
      barbarians. 42 The slothful effeminacy of the former exposed them
      to the contempt, the sullen ferociousness of the latter excited
      the aversion, of the conquerors. 43 Those nations had submitted
      to the Roman power, but they seldom desired or deserved the
      freedom of the city  and it was remarked, that more than two
      hundred and thirty years elapsed after the ruin of the Ptolemies,
      before an Egyptian was admitted into the senate of Rome. 44

      37  return  * See Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5. Augustin. de
      Civitate Dei, xix 7 Lipsius de Pronunciatione Linguae Latinae, c.
      3.*

      38  return  * Apuleius and Augustin will answer for Africa;
      Strabo for Spain and Gaul; Tacitus, in the life of Agricola, for
      Britain; and Velleius Paterculus, for Pannonia. To them we may
      add the language of the Inscriptions. * Note  Mr. Hallam contests
      this assertion as regards Britain. "Nor did the Romans ever
      establish their language-I know not whether they wished to do
      so-in this island, as we perceive by that stubborn British tongue
      which has survived two conquests." In his note, Mr. Hallam
      examines the passage from Tacitus  Agric. xxi.  to which Gibbon
      refers. It merely a
